rework credential and batch credential endpoint (#293)
openid/OpenID4VCI: openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.md

# Credential Endpoint {#credential-endpoint}

The Credential Endpoint issues one or more instances of a Credential Configuration or Credential Dataset as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.

Communication with the Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

The Client may send a Credential Request to obtain:

> * one Credential instance of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset;

Author: ```suggestion
* one Credential of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset;
```

> * multiple Credential instances of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic materials.

Author: ```suggestion
* multiple instances of a Credential of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic materials.
```

> The Credential Endpoint issues a Credential as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Credential Endpoint issues one or more instances of a Credential Configuration or Credential Dataset as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.
```

Communication with the Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

> The Client may send a Credential Request to ask for the issuance of:

Author: ```suggestion
The Client may send a Credential Request to obtain:
```

> * one Credential instance of a particular Credential Configurations and Credential Dataset

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* one Credential instance of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset
```

> * multiple Credential instances a particular Credential Configurations and Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)

Reviewer 3: grammar/wording?
 
```suggestion
* multiple Credential instances of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)
```

> * multiple Credential instances of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)

Author: ```suggestion
* multiple Credential instances of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic materials.
```

# Credential Endpoint {#credential-endpoint}

> The Credential Endpoint issues one or more instances of a Credential Configuration or Credential Dataset as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Credential Endpoint issues one or more instances of a Credential Dataset as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.
```

Credential configuration is merely how credential is described, what is actually issued is credential dataset.

Author: I'm not certain about the proposed changes, I'd like to get more feedback on this from others

Reviewer 4: Batch Endpoint says `each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset`

```suggestion
The Credential Endpoint issues one or more Credentials of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.
```

> The Credential Endpoint issues one or more Credentials of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, as approved by the End-User upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Credential Endpoint issues one or more Credentials of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset (as approved by the End-User) upon presentation of a valid Access Token representing this approval. Support for this endpoint is REQUIRED.
```

Communication with the Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS.

> The Client may send a Credential Request to obtain:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Client sends a Credential Request to obtain:
```
let's avoid lower case may to avoid questions why it is not upper case

> * one Credential;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* one Credential; or
```

> * one Credential of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* one Credential;
```
definition of a credential should be clear enough, no need to mention credential configuration or credential dataset i think

Reviewer 4: to me, this is not about precision, but using the terminology we agreed upon. if it is one Credential, by definition it has one credential configuratio and one credential dataset, so having that is redundant..

> * multiple Credentials of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* multiple Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material.
```

> * multiple Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* multiple Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material, if the Issuer supports the multiple issuance of the same Credential Type.
```

> * multiple instances of a Credential of a particular Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic materials.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* multiple Credentials of a same Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material.
```

Author: ```suggestion
* multiple Credentials of the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, each with distinct cryptographic material.
```

> If the Issuer supports the issuance of multiple Credentials, the Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials in a sequence of his choice.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If the Issuer supports the issuance of multiple Credentials, the Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials in a chosen sequence.
```

gender neutral.

> The Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials with the same or different Credential Datasets. If the Access Token allows the request for multiple Credentials, the Client has the flexibility to determine the sequence in which they are requested.

Reviewer 6: this last sentence is a repetition of the last point. We should remove this repetition and include the following sentece

````
it is important to
note that the ability to do so depends on whether the Issuer supports the multiple
issuance of the same Credential Type or the refresh of the Credential.
````

Author: please check the proposal

> The Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials with the same or different Credential Datasets. If the Access Token allows the request for multiple Credentials, the Client has the flexibility to determine the sequence in which they are requested.

Author: ```suggestion
If the Issuer supports the issuance of multiple Credentials, the Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials in a sequence of his choice.
```

> The Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials with varying Credential Configurations or Credential Datasets. If the Access Token allows the request for multiple Credentials, the Client has the flexibility to determine the sequence in which these Credentials are requested.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Client can send several consecutive Credential Requests to obtain multiple Credentials with the same or different Credential Datasets. If the Access Token allows the request for multiple Credentials, the Client has the flexibility to determine the sequence in which they are requested.
```

A Client makes a Credential Request to the Credential Endpoint by sending the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request using the `application/json` media type.

* `format`: REQUIRED when the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. It is a String that determines the format of the Credential to be issued, which may determine the type and any other information related to the Credential to be issued. Credential Format Profiles consist of the Credential format specific parameters that are defined in (#format-profiles). When this parameter is used, the `credential_identifier` Credential Request parameter MUST NOT be present.
* `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED when `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. It is a String that identifies a Credential that is being requested to be issued. When this parameter is used, the `format` parameter and any other Credential format specific parameters such as those defined in (#format-profiles) MUST NOT be present.

> * `proof`: OPTIONAL. Object containing a proof of possession of the cryptographic key material that the issued Credential SHALL be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used. If the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and included in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential, then either the proof or proofs parameter is REQUIRED. The `proof` object MUST contain the following:

Author: ```suggestion
* `proof`: OPTIONAL. Object containing a proof of possession of the cryptographic key material that the issued Credential SHALL be bound to. `proof` MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used.  The `proof` object MUST contain the following:
```

    * `proof_type`: REQUIRED. String specifing the key proof type. The value set for this parameter determines the additional parameters in the key proof object and their corresponding processing rules. The key proof types outlined in this specification are detailed in (#proof-types).

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects that provide proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. Each object MUST contain the values as defined in the `proof` object. `proofs` MUST NOT be present if `proof` is used. 

Reviewer: this definition does not match the new syntax proposed for `proofs`

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects containing proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material that the issued Credential instances shall be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used. Either `proof` or `proofs` parameter is REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. MUST NOT be used when `proofs` is present. The `proofs` object MUST contain an array of objects equivalent to the values defined by the `proof` object.

Author: ```suggestion
* `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects that provide proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used. Either `proof` or `proofs` parameter is REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. MUST NOT be used when `proofs` is present. The `proofs` object MUST contain an array of objects that correspond to the values defined in the `proof` object.
```

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects that provide proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. It MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used. Either `proof` or `proofs` parameter is REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. MUST NOT be used when `proofs` is present. The `proofs` object MUST contain an array of objects that correspond to the values defined in the `proof` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects that provide proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. Each object MUST contain the values as defined in the `proof` object. `proofs` MUST NOT be present if `proof` is used. 
```

A Client makes a Credential Request to the Credential Endpoint by sending the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request using the `application/json` media type.

* `format`: REQUIRED when the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. It is a String that determines the format of the Credential to be issued, which may determine the type and any other information related to the Credential to be issued. Credential Format Profiles consist of the Credential format specific parameters that are defined in (#format-profiles). When this parameter is used, the `credential_identifier` Credential Request parameter MUST NOT be present.
* `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED when `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. It is a String that identifies a Credential that is being requested to be issued. When this parameter is used, the `format` parameter and any other Credential format specific parameters such as those defined in (#format-profiles) MUST NOT be present.

> * `proof`: OPTIONAL. Object providing a single proof of possession of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instance SHALL be bound to. `proof` MUST NOT be present if `proofs` is used.  The `proof` object MUST contain the following:

Reviewer 4: is `SHALL` really necessary here?

```suggestion
* `proof`: OPTIONAL. Object providing a single proof of possession of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instance will be bound to. `proof` parameter MUST NOT be present if `proofs` parameter is used.  The `proof` object MUST contain the following:
```

Reviewer 4: my thinking was that the ultimate decision what to issue sits with the issuer, so SHALL/MUST was too strong, but I also don't see why the issuer would not bind an issued credential to the wallet-provided key material, so `will be` was a good balance. cc @bc-pi , curious what you would think

Reviewer 3: In general, I tend to prefer not using the uppercase keywords unless there's an obvious need/value in doing so. That's pretty subjective, of course, but `will` seems okay here.

Reviewer 3: noting that `proofs` currently has similar language "issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to."

Author: ok, I will remove the SHALL from all occurances around proof(s)

    * `proof_type`: REQUIRED. String specifying the key proof type. The value set for this parameter determines the additional parameters in the key proof object and their corresponding processing rules. The key proof types outlined in this specification are detailed in (#proof-types).

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing one or more proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. `proofs` MUST NOT be present if `proof` is used. The `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type.

Reviewer 4: for the interoperability's sake, when only one proof of possession is provided, it should be `proof` and not `proofs` structure that is used.

```suggestion
* `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing more than one proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. `proofs` MUST NOT be present if `proof` is used. The `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type.
```

Author: I would disagree, allowing the single proof in the proofs object, may give the option in the future to eliminate proof if there is broad adoption

Reviewer 4: discussed in the WG. agreed to keep `one or more` because `more than one` sounds weird as a definition of an object...

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing one or more proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. `proofs` MUST NOT be present if `proof` is used. The `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type.

Author: ```suggestion
* `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing one or more proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances will be bound to. The `proofs` parameter MUST NOT be present if `proof` parameter is used. The `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type.
```

> * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing one or more proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances will be bound to. The `proofs` parameter MUST NOT be present if `proof` parameter is used. `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type.

Reviewer 2: Something that I think we need to be clearer on here is whether a credential issuer needs to support the proof and proofs parameter in the credential request. E.g does a credential issuer need to support both, if so this is a breaking change right, all be it unlikely to affect implementations in the short term?

Author: Please see the metadata introduced in this PR

}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Either proof or proofs parameter is REQUIRED if the proof_types_supported parameter is non-empty and present in the credential_configurations_supported parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.
```

{
   "credential_identifier": "CivilEngineeringDegree-2023",

>    "proofs": [
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       },
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       }
>    ]

Author: ```suggestion
   "proofs": {
      "proof_type": "jwt",
      "jwt": [
         "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
         "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
      ] 
   }
   
```
What about this?

>    "proofs": [
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       },
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       }
>    ]

Author: Or even more radically simplified:
```suggestion
   "proof_type": "jwt",
   "proofs": [
      "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
      "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
   ]
```

Reviewer 3: simpler is usually better...

Reviewer 7: Would we then pull out the `proof_type` for `proof` as well?

>    "proofs": [
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       },
>       {
>         "proof_type": "jwt",
>         "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXBy...mlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>       }
>    ]

Author: ```suggestion
   "proofs": {
      "jwt": [
         "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
         "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
      [
   }
```

Reviewer 8: This seems better.

Reviewer: This makes sense if we assume a credential data set always maps to a single credential format. And I think we do. However, an example for such a multi format data set would be a PID (Person Identification Data under eIDAS) with instances in mdoc and sd-jwt vc. I just realize that the differentiation in separate data sets may have an impact on the UX as the user consents on the level of the data set, right?

   }
}
```

> Note: Either proof or proofs parameter is REQUIRED if the proof_types_supported parameter is non-empty and present in the credential_configurations_supported parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

Either `proof` or `proofs` parameter MUST be present if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.

```

usually we would put "This parameter MUST be present if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential" in the definitions of both `proof` and `proofs` parameters above.

also empty `proof_types_supported` parameter would be illegal, no?

}
```

> Either `proof` or `proofs` parameter MUST be present if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Either the `proof` or `proofs` parameter MUST be present if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.
```

### Proof Types {#proof-types}

This specification defines the following proof types:

> * `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. This implies for `proof` objects that the `proof_type` parameter is set to `jwt` and a `jwt` parameter contains a JWT defined in (#jwt-proof-type) MUST be used. This implies for `proofs` objects that a `jwt` parameter containing an array of JWTs defined in (#jwt-proof-type) MUST be used.
> * `cwt`: A CWT [@!RFC8392] is used for proof of possession. This implies for `proof` objects that the `proof_type` parameter is set to `cwt` and a `cwt` parameter contains a CWT defined in (#cwt-proof-type) MUST be used. This implies for `proofs` objects that a `cwt` parameter containing an array of CWTs defined in (#cwt-proof-type) MUST be used.
> * `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. This implies for `proof` objects that the `proof_type` parameter is set to `ldp_vp` and a `ldp_vp` parameter containing a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type) MUST be used. This implies for `proofs` objects that an `ldp_vp` parameter containing an array of [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type) MUST be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `jwt`, it MUST also contain a `jwt` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#jwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `jwt` proof type, it MUST include a `jwt` parameter containing an array of JWTs as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).
* `cwt`: A CWT [@!RFC8392] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `cwt`, it MUST also contain a `cwt` parameter that includes a CWT as defined in (#cwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `cwt` proof type, it MUST include a `cwt` parameter containing an array of CWTs as defined in (#cwt-proof-type).
* `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter containing a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).
```

there might be even cleaner way to say it but at least trying to replace `it implies..`

### Proof Types {#proof-types}

This specification defines the following proof types:

> * `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `jwt`, it MUST also contain a `jwt` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#jwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `jwt` proof type, it MUST include a `jwt` parameter containing an array of JWTs as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set using the member name `jwt`, its value MUST be an array of JWT, where each JWT MUST be formed as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).
```

sorry guys but this last sentece was really not clear to me.

Author: Your suggestion is mixing things up. The initial proposal first talks about `proof`, then about `proofs`. The latter is missing now

Author: I apply your ideas to the `proofs` section, if this doesn't match your expectations, please open an Issue/PR

> * `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `jwt`, it MUST also contain a `jwt` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#jwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `jwt` proof type, it MUST include a `jwt` parameter containing an array of JWTs as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).

Author: ```suggestion
* `jwt`: A JWT [@!RFC7519] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `jwt`, it MUST also contain a `jwt` parameter that includes a JWT as defined in (#jwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `jwt` proof type, it MUST include a `jwt` parameter with its value being an array of JWTs, where each JWT is formed as defined in (#jwt-proof-type).
```

> * `cwt`: A CWT [@!RFC8392] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `cwt`, it MUST also contain a `cwt` parameter that includes a CWT as defined in (#cwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `cwt` proof type, it MUST include a `cwt` parameter containing an array of CWTs as defined in (#cwt-proof-type).

Reviewer 6: I would simplify in the same way I proposed for the `jwt`, if it is clear to you. The target is make it more simple.

Reviewer 4: not sure what you mean here..?

> * `cwt`: A CWT [@!RFC8392] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `cwt`, it MUST also contain a `cwt` parameter that includes a CWT as defined in (#cwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `cwt` proof type, it MUST include a `cwt` parameter containing an array of CWTs as defined in (#cwt-proof-type).

Author: ```suggestion
* `cwt`: A CWT [@!RFC8392] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `cwt`, it MUST also contain a `cwt` parameter that includes a CWT as defined in (#cwt-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `cwt` proof type, it MUST include a `cwt` parameter with its value being an array of CWTs, where each CWT is formed as defined in (#cwt-proof-type).
```

> * `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter containing a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).

Reviewer 3: sigh... shouldn't the ldp_vp proofs thing have an array of those things?

> * `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter containing a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).

Author: ```suggestion
* `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter containing an array of [W3C Verifiable Presentations](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).
```

> * `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter containing an array of [W3C Verifiable Presentations](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).

Author: ```suggestion
* `ldp_vp`: A W3C Verifiable Presentation object signed using the Data Integrity Proof [@VC_Data_Integrity] as defined in [@VC_DATA_2.0] or [@VC_DATA] is used for proof of possession. When a `proof_type` parameter in a `proof` object is set to `ldp_vp`, it MUST also contain an `ldp_vp` parameter that includes a [W3C Verifiable Presentation](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0) defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type). When a `proofs` object is using a `ldp_vp` proof type, it MUST include an `ldp_vp` parameter with its value being an array of [W3C Verifiable Presentations](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/#presentations-0), where each of these W3C Verifiable PRsentation is formed as defined in (#ldp-vp-proof-type).
```

  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). The value of this claim MUST be the time at which the key proof was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL (string). The value type of this claim MUST be a string, where the value is a server-provided `c_nonce`. It MUST be present when the Wallet received a server-provided `c_nonce`.

> The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the proof JWT is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.
```

  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). The value of this claim MUST be the time at which the key proof was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL (string). The value type of this claim MUST be a string, where the value is a server-provided `c_nonce`. It MUST be present when the Wallet received a server-provided `c_nonce`.

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

Cryptographic algorithm names used in the `proof_signing_alg_values_supported` Credential Issuer metadata parameter for this proof type SHOULD be one of those defined in [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS].

> Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter:

Author: ```suggestion
Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):
```

  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). The value of this claim MUST be the time at which the key proof was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL (string). The value type of this claim MUST be a string, where the value is a server-provided `c_nonce`. It MUST be present when the Wallet received a server-provided `c_nonce`.

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

Cryptographic algorithm names used in the `proof_signing_alg_values_supported` Credential Issuer metadata parameter for this proof type SHOULD be one of those defined in [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS].

Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter:

```json
{
  "proof_type": "jwt",

>   "jwt":

Author: ```suggestion
  "jwt": 
```

  * `iat`: REQUIRED (number). The value of this claim MUST be the time at which the key proof was issued using the syntax defined in [@!RFC7519].
  * `nonce`: OPTIONAL (string). The value type of this claim MUST be a string, where the value is a server-provided `c_nonce`. It MUST be present when the Wallet received a server-provided `c_nonce`.

The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the `proof` is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.
The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the JWT used as a proof is actually signed by a key identified in the JOSE Header.

Cryptographic algorithm names used in the `proof_signing_alg_values_supported` Credential Issuer metadata parameter for this proof type SHOULD be one of those defined in [@IANA.JOSE.ALGS].

> Below is a non-normative example of a `proof` parameter (with line breaks within values for display purposes only):

Reviewer 3: only display purposes but they had a purpose

```json
{
  "proof_type": "jwt",

>   "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXByb29mK2p3dCIsImFsZyI6IkVTMjU2IiwiandrIjp7Imt0eSI6IkVDIiwiY3J2IjoiUC0yNTYiLCJ4IjoiblVXQW9BdjNYWml0aDhFN2kxOU9kYXhPTFlGT3dNLVoyRXVNMDJUaXJUNCIsInkiOiJIc2tIVThCalVpMVU5WHFpN1N3bWo4Z3dBS18weGtjRGpFV183MVNvc0VZIn19.eyJhdWQiOiJodHRwczovL2NyZWRlbnRpYWwtaXNzdWVyLmV4YW1wbGUuY29tIiwiaWF0IjoxNzAxOTYwNDQ0LCJub25jZSI6IkxhclJHU2JtVVBZdFJZTzZCUTR5bjgifQ.-a3EDsxClUB4O3LeDD5DVGEnNMT01FCQW4P6-2-BNBqc_Zxf0Qw4CWayLEpqkAomlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"

Reviewer 3: this probably doesn't look great in the rendered version

>   "jwt": "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXByb29mK2p3dCIsImFsZyI6IkVTMjU2IiwiandrIjp7Imt0eSI6IkVDIiwiY3J2IjoiUC0yNTYiLCJ4IjoiblVXQW9BdjNYWml0aDhFN2kxOU9kYXhPTFlGT3dNLVoyRXVNMDJUaXJUNCIsInkiOiJIc2tIVThCalVpMVU5WHFpN1N3bWo4Z3dBS18weGtjRGpFV183MVNvc0VZIn19.eyJhdWQiOiJodHRwczovL2NyZWRlbnRpYWwtaXNzdWVyLmV4YW1wbGUuY29tIiwiaWF0IjoxNzAxOTYwNDQ0LCJub25jZSI6IkxhclJHU2JtVVBZdFJZTzZCUTR5bjgifQ.-a3EDsxClUB4O3LeDD5DVGEnNMT01FCQW4P6-2-BNBqc_Zxf0Qw4CWayLEpqkAomlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"

Author: ```suggestion
  "jwt":
  "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpLXByb29mK2p3dCIsImFsZyI6IkVTMjU2IiwiandrI
  jp7Imt0eSI6IkVDIiwiY3J2IjoiUC0yNTYiLCJ4IjoiblVXQW9BdjNYWml0aDhFN2k
  xOU9kYXhPTFlGT3dNLVoyRXVNMDJUaXJUNCIsInkiOiJIc2tIVThCalVpMVU5WHFpN
  1N3bWo4Z3dBS18weGtjRGpFV183MVNvc0VZIn19.eyJhdWQiOiJodHRwczovL2NyZW
  RlbnRpYWwtaXNzdWVyLmV4YW1wbGUuY29tIiwiaWF0IjoxNzAxOTYwNDQ0LCJub25j
  ZSI6IkxhclJHU2JtVVBZdFJZTzZCUTR5bjgifQ.-a3EDsxClUB4O3LeDD5DVGEnNMT
  01FCQW4P6-2-BNBqc_Zxf0Qw4CWayLEpqkAomlkLb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
```

  * `domain`: REQUIRED (string). The value of this claim MUST be the Credential Issuer Identifier.
  * `challenge`: REQUIRED when the Credential Issuer has provided a `c_nonce`. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. String, where the value is a server-provided `c_nonce`. It MUST be present when the Wallet received a server-provided `c_nonce`.

> The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the W3C Verifiable Presentation is actually signed with a key in the possession of the Holder.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Credential Issuer MUST validate that the W3C Verifiable Presentation used as a proof is actually signed with a key in the possession of the Holder.
```

The following parameters are used in the JSON-encoded Credential Response body:

> * `credential`: OPTIONAL. Contains issued Credential. It MUST not be used  if `credentials` or `transaction_id` is present. It MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `credential`: OPTIONAL. Contains issued Credential. It MUST NOT be used if `credentials` or `transaction_id` parameter is present. It MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.
```

> * `credentials`: OPTIONAL. Contains an array of issued Credentials. It MUST not be used  if `credential` or `transaction_id` is present. The values in the array MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `credentials`: OPTIONAL. Contains an array of issued Credentials. It MUST NOT be used if `credential` or `transaction_id` is present. The values in the array MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.
```

The following parameters are used in the JSON-encoded Credential Response body:

* `credential`: OPTIONAL. Contains issued Credential. It MUST NOT be used if `credentials` or `transaction_id` parameter is present. It MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.
* `credentials`: OPTIONAL. Contains an array of issued Credentials. It MUST NOT be used if `credential` or `transaction_id` parameter is present. The values in the array MAY be a string or an object, depending on the Credential format. See (#format-profiles) for the Credential format specific encoding requirements.

> * `transaction_id`: OPTIONAL. String identifying a Deferred Issuance transaction. This claim is contained in the response if the Credential Issuer was unable to immediately issue the Credential. The value is subsequently used to obtain the respective Credential with the Deferred Credential Endpoint (see (#deferred-credential-issuance)). It MUST not be used  if `credential` or `credentials` is present. It MUST be invalidated after the Credential for which it was meant has been obtained by the Wallet.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* `transaction_id`: OPTIONAL. String identifying a Deferred Issuance transaction. This claim is contained in the response if the Credential Issuer cannot immediately issue the Credential. The value is subsequently used to obtain the respective Credential with the Deferred Credential Endpoint (see (#deferred-credential-issuance)). It MUST not be used  if `credential` or `credentials` are present. It MUST be invalidated after the Credential for which it was meant has been obtained by the Wallet.
```

}
```

> Below is a non-normative example of a Credential Response in an immediate issuance flow for a batch of Credential instances in JWT VC format (JSON encoded):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a non-normative example of a Credential Response in an immediate issuance flow for a multiple Credential instances in JWT VC format (JSON encoded):
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{

>   "credentials": [

Reviewer 8: again an chance to be more specific with media types.

perhaps an example of CWT would be good here, can the response contain both JWT and CWT in a single response?

Author: I believe the argument here was that the Client/Wallet knows which Credential Configuration, i.e. Credential Format, is requested in the Credential Request, therefore this information would be redundant.

Author: please open a separate issue for this, if you want to pursue this, I believe it is out of scope for this PR

}
```

Below is a non-normative example of a Credential Response in an immediate issuance flow for a batch of Credential instances in JWT VC format (JSON encoded):

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

> Cache-Control: no-store

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

}
```

Below is a non-normative example of a Credential Response in an immediate issuance flow for multiple Credential instances in JWT VC format (JSON encoded):

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "credentials": [
    "LUpixVCWJk0eOt4CXQe1NXK....WZwmhmn9OQp6YxX0a2L",

>     "YXNkZnNhZGZkamZqZGFza23....29tZTIzMjMyMzIzMjMy",

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    "YXNkZnNhZGZkamZqZGFza23....29tZTIzMjMyMzIzMjMy"
```

* different Credential Datasets
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)
* a combination of the points above

Wallets need to differentiate between these options because they can lead to variations in User experience, as outlined in the TODO reference to terminology.

## Batch Credential Request {#batch-credential-request}

A Client submits a Credential Request to the Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.

* `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.
  * `format`: REQUIRED if the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
  * `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED if `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).

>   * `proofs`: REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. This parameter contains an array of proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential SHALL be bound to. Each element in the array is an object representing a proof, as specified in (#proof-types). Each proofs corresponds to a request for a Credential instance with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, but with a different cryptographic binding.

Author: ```suggestion
  * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Array of objects that provide proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. Each object MUST contain the values as defined in (#proof-types). The `proofs` parameter is REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.
```

>   * `proofs`: REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. It contains an array of proof of possessions the cryptographic key material the issued Credential would be bound to. Each element within the array  contains an object of a proof as defined in (#proof-types). Each of these proofs requests an instance of a Credential with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset but with different cryptographic binding.

Author: ```suggestion
  * `proofs`: REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. This parameter contains an array of proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential SHALL be bound to. Each element in the array is an object representing a proof, as specified in (#proof-types). Each proofs corresponds to a request for a Credential instance with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset, but with a different cryptographic binding.
```

>   * `proofs`: REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential. It contains an array of proof of possessions the cryptographic key material the issued Credential would be bound to. Each element within the array  contains an object of a proof as defined in (#proof-types). Each of these proofs requests an instance of a Credential with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset but with different cryptographic binding.

Author: applied with minor changes

Communication with the Batch Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS. 

The Client can request issuance of multiple Credentials, that may be:

> * different Credential Configurations (with possibly different Credential Formats)
> * different Credential Datasets
> * different Credential instances of the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```suggestion
* different Credential Configurations (with possibly different Credential Formats)
* different Credential Datasets
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)
```
* different Credential instances of the different Credential Dataset
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)
```
to me there should be only these two variants

Author: you could have the same Credential Dataset with different Credential Configurations, i.e. PID in SD-JWT VC and ISO mdoc

* a combination of the points above

> Wallets need to differentiate between these options because they can lead to variations in User experience, as outlined in the TODO reference to terminology.

Reviewer 4: what is this TODO?

Author: please check the proposal

## Batch Credential Request {#batch-credential-request}

> A Client submits a Credential Request to the Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A Client submits a Batch Credential Request to the Batch Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.
```

* `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.

>   * `format`: REQUIRED if the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
>   * `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED if `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
>   * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. Object providing one or more proof of possessions of the cryptographic key material to which the issued Credential instances SHALL be bound to. The `proofs` object contains exactly one parameter named as the proof type in (#proof-types), the value set for this parameter is an array containing parameters as defined by the corresponding proof type. The `proofs` parameter is REQUIRED if the `proof_types_supported` parameter is non-empty and present in the `credential_configurations_supported` parameter of the Issuer metadata for the requested Credential.

Author: ```suggestion
  * `format`: REQUIRED if the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
  * `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED if `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
  * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. See (#credential-request).
```

Reviewer 4: actually, this part is a merge conflict with #319. changing a text introduced there to below is probably sufficient (cc @c2bo )
> The individual Credential Request objects MUST NOT contain `credential_response_encryption` and `proof`.

* different Credential instances of the different Credential Configurations
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration but the different Credential Dataset
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)
* a combination of the points above

Wallets need to differentiate between these options because they can lead to variations in user experience. While Credentials with the same Credential Configuration but different Credential Dataset should be displayed separately (e.g. vehicle registration credentials for multiple cars), Credentials with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset (e.g. multiple age proofs for unlinkability) should only appear as a single Credential in the Wallet user interface, as these technical details are not relevant to the average End-user. 

## Batch Credential Request {#batch-credential-request}

A Client submits a Batch Credential Request to the Batch Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.

> * `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.

Author: ```suggestion
* `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset. A Batch Credential Request object contains either a `format` parameter (and possibly further Credential Format specific parameters) or a `credential_identifier` parameter, an optional `proofs` parameter, but no `proof` or `credential_response_encryption` parameter.
```

Communication with the Batch Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS. 

The Client can request issuance of multiple Credentials that can be:

> * different Credential instances of the different Credential Configurations
> * different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration but the different Credential Dataset
> * different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material)

Author: ```suggestion
* different Credential instances of the different Credential Configurations; or
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration but the different Credential Dataset; or
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material); or
```

## Batch Credential Request {#batch-credential-request}

A Client submits a Batch Credential Request to the Batch Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.

* `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset. A Batch Credential Request object contains either a `format` parameter (and possibly further Credential Format specific parameters) or a `credential_identifier` parameter, an optional `proofs` parameter, but no `proof` or `credential_response_encryption` parameter.

>   * `format`: REQUIRED if the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).

Reviewer 5: The three parameters here are essentially re-used from above. I think that a credential request data structure should be explicitly defined above for the single-credential endpoint and then that definition can be re-used here.

Communication with the Batch Credential Endpoint MUST utilize TLS. 

The Client can request issuance of multiple Credentials that can be:

* different Credential instances of the different Credential Configurations; or
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration but the different Credential Dataset; or
* different Credential instances of the same Credential Configuration and the same Credential Dataset (with different cryptographic material); or

> * a combination of the points above

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* a combination of the points above.
```

Wallets need to differentiate between these options because they can lead to variations in user experience. While Credentials with the same Credential Configuration but different Credential Dataset should be displayed separately (e.g. vehicle registration credentials for multiple cars), Credentials with the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset (e.g. multiple age proofs for unlinkability) should only appear as a single Credential in the Wallet user interface, as these technical details are not relevant to the average End-user. 

## Batch Credential Request {#batch-credential-request}

A Client submits a Batch Credential Request to the Batch Credential Endpoint by sending a JSON object containing the following parameters in the entity-body of an HTTP POST request, using the `application/json` media type.

> * `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset. A Batch Credential Request object contains either a `format` parameter (and possibly further Credential Format specific parameters) or a `credential_identifier` parameter, an optional `proofs` parameter, but no `proof` or `credential_response_encryption` parameter.

Reviewer 6: ok, but.

All those conditions are poison for the developers and may represent huge design failures.

I would not ask to a developer about doing something with more than 3 conditions to be taken into account simultaneously.

out of scope for this PR but let's try to redesign something to keep it simple and more linear

Author: part of the problem here is that Batch Credential Endpoint isn't defined on its own but rather a modification of Credential Endpoint. Two points may solve this in the future: Either removing batch endpoint altogether #18 or we get some simplifications form #294. However I will drag this monstrous sentence in two parts to make it easier to read and conditions are better understandable.

> * `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset. A Batch Credential Request object contains either a `format` parameter (and possibly further Credential Format specific parameters) or a `credential_identifier` parameter, an optional `proofs` parameter, but no `proof` or `credential_response_encryption` parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
* `credential_requests`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Request objects, each of these objects may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset. A Batch Credential Request object contains either a `format` parameter (and possibly further Credential Format specific parameters) or a `credential_identifier` parameter, and additionally an optional `proofs` parameter. A Batch Credential Request object must not contain `proof` or `credential_response_encryption` parameters.
```

  * `format`: REQUIRED if the `credential_identifiers` parameter was not returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
  * `credential_identifier`: REQUIRED if `credential_identifiers` parameter was returned from the Token Response. It MUST NOT be used otherwise. See (#credential-request).
  * `proofs`: OPTIONAL. See (#credential-request).
* `credential_response_encryption`: OPTIONAL. Object containing information for encrypting the Batch Credential Response. It contains the same parameters as defined in #{credential-request}. If this request element is not present, the corresponding Batch Credential Response returned is not encrypted.

Below is a non-normative example of a Batch Credential Request requesting:

> * 2 Credentials for the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset but with different cryptographic binding keys
> * 2 Credentials for the same Credential Configuration but with different Credential Dataset

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* 2 Credentials for the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset but with different cryptographic binding keys;
* 2 Credentials for the same Credential Configuration but with different Credential Dataset.
```

             "UniversityDegreeCredential"
           ]
         },

>          "proofs": [
>             {
>                "proof_type":"jwt",
>                "jwt":"eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>             },
>             {
>                "proof_type":"jwt",
>                "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
>             }
>          ]

Author: ```suggestion
         "proofs": {
            "proof_type":"jwt",
            "jwt": [
               "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
               "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            [
         }
```
What about this?

Reviewer 3: or... 
```suggestion
         "proofs": {
            "type":"jwt",
            "values": [
               "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
               "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            [
         }
```

but regardless this https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#name-ldp_vp-proof-type unfortunately needs to be considered or basically the fact that proof is an object for extensibility https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VCI/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-wg-draft.html#section-7.2-2.2.1

>          "proofs": [
>             {
>                "proof_type":"jwt",
>                "jwt":"eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA"
>             },
>             {
>                "proof_type":"jwt",
>                "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
>             }
>          ]

Author: this is the most simple solution(mirrored from credential endpoint suggestion).
Imo for ldp, you could still use JSON objects as proof array values?
```suggestion
         "proof_type":"jwt",
         "proofs": [
            "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
            "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
         ]
```

      },
      {
         "credential_identifier":"CivilEngineeringDegree-2023",
         "proofs": [
            {
               "proof_type":"jwt",
               "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            }
         ]
      },
      {

>          "credential_identifier":"ElectricalEngineeringDegree-2023",

Reviewer 8: this seems like a type, is this supposed to match up with `vct` ?

Author: In the new terminology it is called an identifier for a Credential Dataset, so it references a dataset for a particular Credential Configuration. For example, if you requested a diploma from university, they could offer you all diplomas that you requested, all of the same "type" but with different claim values. The identifier  could then be (optionally) used in the Credential Request

The encoding of the Credential returned in the `credential` parameter depends on the Credential Format. Credential formats expressed as binary data MUST be base64url-encoded and returned as a string.

More details such as Credential Format identifiers are defined in the Credential Format Profiles in (#format-profiles).

Below is a non-normative example of a Batch Credential Response containing:
* 2 Credentials for the same Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset but with different cryptographic binding keys
* 1 Credential for a different  Credential Configuration and Credential Dataset
* 1 Transaction ID for a request that could not be immediately fulfilled

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "credential_responses": [
     {
        "credentials": [
           "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZTpl...C_aZKPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM",
           "YXNkZnNhZGZkamZqZGFza23....29tZTIzMjMyMzIzMjMy"
        ]
     },
     {
        "credentials": [
           "YXNkZnNhZGZkamZqZGFza23....29tZTIzMjMyMzIzMjMy"
        ],
        "notification_id" : "3fwe98js"
     },
     {
        "transaction_id":"8xLOxBtZp8"
     }
  ],

>   "c_nonce": "fGFF7UkhLa",

Reviewer 8: `c_nonce` seems like it should be more verbose here... does this stand for `credential_nonce`  or `challenge_nonce` ?

Author: From the definition: "c_nonce: OPTIONAL. String containing a nonce to be used to create a proof of possession of key material when requesting a Credential"
So I believe it stands for Credential

             "UniversityDegreeCredential"
           ]
         },
         "proofs": {
            "jwt": [
               "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
               "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            ]
         }
      },
      {
         "credential_identifier":"CivilEngineeringDegree-2023",
         "proofs": [
            {
               "proof_type":"jwt",
               "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            }
         ]
      },
      {
         "credential_identifier":"ElectricalEngineeringDegree-2023",
         "proofs": [
            {
               "proof_type":"jwt",
               "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            }
         ]
      }
   ]
}
```

## Batch Credential Response {#batch-credential-response}

> The Batch Credential Response behaves similarly to the Credential Response. Each response to the requests within the `credential_requests` of the Batch Credential Request can be either immediate or deferred. Consequently, the Credential Issuer MAY immediately issue the requested Credentials or MAY provide a `transaction_id` parameter to the Client, which can be used later to retrieve the Credential once it is ready.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Batch Credential Response behaves similarly to the Credential Response. Each response to the requests within the `credential_requests` of the Batch Credential Request can be either immediate or deferred. Consequently, the Credential Issuer MAY immediately issue the requested Credentials or MAY provide a `transaction_id` parameter to the Client, which can be used later to retrieve the Credential once it is ready.
If at least one of the requested credentials cannot be issued either immediately or deferred, the Credential Issuer MUST return an error.
```

If all requests are responded to with a `transaction_id`, the Issuer MUST use the HTTP status code 202 (as detailed in Section 15.3.3 of [@!RFC9110]). If not, the HTTP status code 200 MUST be used for a successful Batch Credential Response.

The Batch Credential Response may be encrypted if the `credential_response_encryption` object was present in the request, see (#credential-response) for details.
If the Credential Response is not encrypted, the media type of the response MUST be set to `application/json`.

The following parameters are used in the JSON-encoded Batch Credential Response body:

> * `credential_responses`: REQUIRED. Array that contains all Batch Credential Response objects. Each element within the array matches the corresponding Batch Credential Request object by array index in the `credential_requests` parameter of the Batch Credential Request. A Batch Credential Response object contains either a `credentials` object (and possibly a `notification_id`) or a `transaction_id` parameter. Each element may refer to a different Credential Configuration or Credential Dataset.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `credential_responses`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Response objects each corresponding to every Batch Credential Request objects. Each element within the array matches the corresponding Batch Credential Request object by array index in the `credential_requests` parameter. A Batch Credential Response object contains either a `credentials` object (and possibly a `notification_id`) or a `transaction_id` parameter. Each element may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset..
```

  * `notification_id`: OPTIONAL. String identifying a batch of issued Credentials that the Wallet includes in the Notification Request as defined in (#notification). This parameter MUST NOT be present if `credential` parameter is not present.
  * `transaction_id`: REQUIRED if `credentials` is not present within a particular Batch Credential Response object. It contains a String identifying a Deferred Issuance transaction. This claim is contained in the response if the Credential Issuer was unable to immediately issue the Credential. The value is subsequently used to obtain the respective Credential with the Deferred Credential Endpoint (see (#deferred-credential-issuance)). It MUST be invalidated after the Credential for which it was meant has been obtained by the Wallet.
* `c_nonce`: OPTIONAL. The `c_nonce` as defined in (#credential-response).

> * `c_nonce_expires_in`: OPTIONAL. The `c_nonce_expires_in` as defined in (#credential-response).

Reviewer 4: again, why is there a need to redefine the parameters here instead of saying all the parameters defined in (#credential-response) other than `credential` need to be used?

Author: applied simplifications, please recheck

The Batch Credential Response behaves similarly to the Credential Response. Each response to the requests within the `credential_requests` of the Batch Credential Request can be either immediate or deferred. Consequently, the Credential Issuer MAY immediately issue the requested Credentials or MAY provide a `transaction_id` parameter to the Client, which can be used later to retrieve the Credential once it is ready.
If at least one of the requested credentials cannot be issued either immediately or deferred, the Credential Issuer MUST return an error.

If all requests are responded to with a `transaction_id`, the Issuer MUST use the HTTP status code 202 (as detailed in Section 15.3.3 of [@!RFC9110]). If not, the HTTP status code 200 MUST be used for a successful Batch Credential Response.

The Batch Credential Response may be encrypted if the `credential_response_encryption` object was present in the request, see (#credential-response) for details.
If the Credential Response is not encrypted, the media type of the response MUST be set to `application/json`.

The following parameters are used in the JSON-encoded Batch Credential Response body:

> * `credential_responses`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Response objects each corresponding to every Batch Credential Request objects. Each element within the array matches the corresponding Batch Credential Request object by array index in the `credential_requests` parameter. A Batch Credential Response object contains either a `credentials` object (and possibly a `notification_id`) or a `transaction_id` parameter. Each element may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.

Reviewer 4: clarifying something along the lines of below might be even better?:

> , with the exception of `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in`.

```suggestion
* `credential_responses`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Response objects each corresponding to every Batch Credential Request objects. Each element within the array matches the corresponding Batch Credential Request object by array index in the `credential_requests` parameter. A Batch Credential Response object contains either a `credentials` object (and possibly a `notification_id`) or a `transaction_id` parameter, but not `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in` parameters. Each element may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.
```

The following parameters are used in the JSON-encoded Batch Credential Response body:

* `credential_responses`: REQUIRED. Array that contains Batch Credential Response objects each corresponding to every Batch Credential Request objects. Each element within the array matches the corresponding Batch Credential Request object by array index in the `credential_requests` parameter. A Batch Credential Response object contains either a `credentials` object (and possibly a `notification_id`) or a `transaction_id` parameter, but not `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in` parameters. Each element may refer to a different Credential Configuration or the same Credential Configuration with a different Credential Dataset.
  * `credentials`: REQUIRED if `transaction_id` is not present within a particular Batch Credential Response object. The `credentials` as defined in (#credential-response).
  * `notification_id`: OPTIONAL. The `notification_id` as defined in (#credential-response).
  * `transaction_id`: REQUIRED if `credentials` is not present within a particular Batch Credential Response object. The `transaction_id` as defined in (#credential-response).

> * `c_nonce`: OPTIONAL. The `c_nonce` as defined in (#credential-response).

Reviewer 5: As above, the response data structure should be re-used from the single-credential endpoint.

Author: The Batch Response objects do not contain `credential`, `c_nonce` and `c_nonce_expires_in`

         "proofs": {
            "jwt": [
               "eyJ0eXAiOiJvcGVuaWQ0dmNpL...Lb9zioZoipdP-jvh1WlA",
               "eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            ]
         }
      },
      {
         "credential_identifier":"CivilEngineeringDegree-2023",
         "proofs": [
            {
               "proof_type":"jwt",
               "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            }
         ]
      },
      {
         "credential_identifier":"ElectricalEngineeringDegree-2023",
         "proofs": [
            {
               "proof_type":"jwt",
               "jwt":"eyJraWQiOiJkaWQ6ZXhhbXBsZ...KPxgihac0aW9EkL1nOzM"
            }
         ]
      }
   ]
}
```

## Batch Credential Response {#batch-credential-response}

The Batch Credential Response behaves similarly to the Credential Response. Each response to the requests within the `credential_requests` of the Batch Credential Request can be either immediate or deferred. Consequently, the Credential Issuer MAY immediately issue the requested Credentials or MAY provide a `transaction_id` parameter to the Client, which can be used later to retrieve the Credential once it is ready.

> If at least one of the requested credentials cannot be issued either immediately or deferred, the Credential Issuer MUST return an error.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If at least one of the requested Credentials cannot be issued either immediately or deferred, the Credential Issuer MUST return an error.
```

> If all requests are responded to with a `transaction_id`, the Issuer MUST use the HTTP status code 202 (as detailed in Section 15.3.3 of [@!RFC9110]). If not, the HTTP status code 200 MUST be used for a successful Batch Credential Response.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If all requests are responded to using a `transaction_id`, the Issuer MUST use the HTTP status code 202 (as detailed in Section 15.3.3 of [@!RFC9110]). If not, the HTTP status code 200 MUST be used for a successful Batch Credential Response.
```

The Batch Credential Request MUST fail entirely if there is even one Credential that failed to be issued. `transaction_id` MUST NOT be returned in this case.

> When the Credential Issuer requires `proofs` objects to be present in the Batch Credential Request, but does not receive them, it will return a Batch Credential Error Response with a `c_nonce` using `invalid_proof` error code, as defined in (#issuer-provided-nonce).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the Credential Issuer requires the `proofs` parameter to be present in the Batch Credential Request, but does not receive them, it will return a Batch Credential Error Response with a `c_nonce` using `invalid_proof` error code, as defined in (#issuer-provided-nonce).
```

  * `enc_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array containing a list of the JWE [@!RFC7516] encryption algorithms (`enc` values) [@!RFC7518] supported by the Credential and Batch Credential Endpoint to encode the Credential or Batch Credential Response in a JWT [@!RFC7519].
  * `encryption_required`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer requires the additional encryption on top of TLS for the Credential Response. If the value is `true`, the Credential Issuer requires encryption for every Credential Response and therefore the Wallet MUST provide encryption keys in the Credential Request. If the value is `false`, the Wallet MAY chose whether it provides encryption keys or not.
* `credential_identifiers_supported`: OPTIONAL. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer supports returning `credential_identifiers` parameter in the `authorization_details` Token Response parameter, with `true` indicating support. If omitted, the default value is `false`.
* `batch_credential_issuance`: OPTIONAL. Object containing information about the Credential Issuer's supports for batch issuance of Credentials.

>   * `credential_endpoint_supported`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer's Credential Edpoint supports the `proofs` parameter in the Credential Request, with `true` indicating support.

Author: he can do so, do you want credential_endpoint_supported to be OPTIONAL and default is false?

>   * `credential_endpoint_supported`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer's Credential Edpoint supports the `proofs` parameter in the Credential Request, with `true` indicating support.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * `credential_endpoint_supported`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer's Credential Edpoint supports the `proofs` parameter in the Credential Request, with `true` indicating support. When this parameter is set to `true`, but the Credential Issuer does not support Batch Credential Endpoint, it means that Credential Issuer issues Credential Batches only from the Credential Endpoint.
```

  * `enc_values_supported`: REQUIRED. Array containing a list of the JWE [@!RFC7516] encryption algorithms (`enc` values) [@!RFC7518] supported by the Credential and Batch Credential Endpoint to encode the Credential or Batch Credential Response in a JWT [@!RFC7519].
  * `encryption_required`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer requires the additional encryption on top of TLS for the Credential Response. If the value is `true`, the Credential Issuer requires encryption for every Credential Response and therefore the Wallet MUST provide encryption keys in the Credential Request. If the value is `false`, the Wallet MAY chose whether it provides encryption keys or not.
* `credential_identifiers_supported`: OPTIONAL. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer supports returning `credential_identifiers` parameter in the `authorization_details` Token Response parameter, with `true` indicating support. If omitted, the default value is `false`.

> * `batch_credential_issuance`: OPTIONAL. Object containing information about the Credential Issuer's supports for batch issuance of Credentials.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `batch_credential_issuance`: OPTIONAL. Object containing information about the Credential Issuer's supports for batch issuance of Credentials. When this parameter is present, but the Credential Issuer does not support Batch Credential Endpoint, it means that Credential Issuer issues Credential Batches only from the Credential Endpoint.
```

* `credential_identifiers_supported`: OPTIONAL. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer supports returning `credential_identifiers` parameter in the `authorization_details` Token Response parameter, with `true` indicating support. If omitted, the default value is `false`.
* `batch_credential_issuance`: OPTIONAL. Object containing information about the Credential Issuer's supports for batch issuance of Credentials. When this parameter is present, but the Credential Issuer does not support Batch Credential Endpoint, it means that Credential Issuer issues Credential Batches only from the Credential Endpoint.
  * `credential_endpoint_supported`: REQUIRED. Boolean value specifying whether the Credential Issuer's Credential Edpoint supports the `proofs` parameter in the Credential Request, with `true` indicating support.

>   * `batch_size`: REQUIRED. Integer value specifying the maximum array size for the `proofs` parameter in a Credential Request or Batch Credential Request.

Reviewer 5: No limit on the number of credential requests per batch request?

Author: What would you propose? The Batch Endpoint also does not have an upper limit currently.

Author: agreed with Daniel to close this

# Document History

   [[ To be removed from the final specification ]]

   -14

>    * changed Batch Issuance endpoint to differentiate between issuance Credential Configuration, Credential Dataset and instances of Credentials with different key material

Reviewer 3: also 

```suggestion
   * changed Batch Issuance endpoint to differentiate between issuance Credential Configuration, Credential Dataset and instances of Credentials with different key material
   * changed Credential Endpoint to enable requesting multiple instances of a particular Credential Configuration and Dataset with different cryptographic material
```
